TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 12 April 2024
DOI 10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY

Guenther Palm,
University of Ulm, Germany

Predictive coding with spiking
neurons and feedforward gist
signaling

REVIEWED BY

Willem Wybo,
Helmholtz Association of German Research
Centres (HZ), Germany
Jean-Philippe Thivierge,
University of Ottawa, Canada
*CORRESPONDENCE

Kwangjun Lee
k.lee@uva.nl
Cyriel M. A. Pennartz
c.m.a.Pennartz@uva.nl
RECEIVED 14 November 2023
ACCEPTED 14 March 2024
PUBLISHED 12 April 2024
CITATION

Lee K, Dora S, Mejias JF, Bohte SM and
Pennartz CMA (2024) Predictive coding with
spiking neurons and feedforward gist
signaling.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 18:1338280.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280
COPYRIGHT

© 2024 Lee, Dora, Mejias, Bohte and
Pennartz. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The
use, distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.

Kwangjun Lee1*, Shirin Dora1,2 , Jorge F. Mejias1 ,
Sander M. Bohte1,3 and Cyriel M. A. Pennartz1*
1
Cognitive and Systems Neuroscience Group, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, Faculty of
Science, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2 Department of Computer Science,
School of Science, Loughborough University, Loughborough, United Kingdom, 3 Machine Learning
Group, Centre of Mathematics and Computer Science, Amsterdam, Netherlands

Predictive coding (PC) is an inﬂuential theory in neuroscience, which suggests
the existence of a cortical architecture that is constantly generating and updating
predictive representations of sensory inputs. Owing to its hierarchical and
generative nature, PC has inspired many computational models of perception in
the literature. However, the biological plausibility of existing models has not been
sufficiently explored due to their use of artiﬁcial neurons that approximate neural
activity with ﬁring rates in the continuous time domain and propagate signals
synchronously. Therefore, we developed a spiking neural network for predictive
coding (SNN-PC), in which neurons communicate using event-driven and
asynchronous spikes. Adopting the hierarchical structure and Hebbian learning
algorithms from previous PC neural network models, SNN-PC introduces two
novel features: (1) a fast feedforward sweep from the input to higher areas,
which generates a spatially reduced and abstract representation of input (i.e., a
neural code for the gist of a scene) and provides a neurobiological alternative
to an arbitrary choice of priors; and (2) a separation of positive and negative
error-computing neurons, which counters the biological implausibility of a bidirectional error neuron with a very high baseline ﬁring rate. After training with
the MNIST handwritten digit dataset, SNN-PC developed hierarchical internal
representations and was able to reconstruct samples it had not seen during
training. SNN-PC suggests biologically plausible mechanisms by which the brain
may perform perceptual inference and learning in an unsupervised manner. In
addition, it may be used in neuromorphic applications that can utilize its energyefficient, event-driven, local learning, and parallel information processing nature.
KEYWORDS

predictive processing, visual cortex, spiking neural network, Hebbian learning,
unsupervised learning, representation learning, recurrent processing, sensory
processing

1 Introduction
In the midst of chaotic barrages of sensory information, the brain achieves
seamless perception of the world. Despite the apparent ease with which the brain
achieves such a formidable feat, the problem of perception is computationally difficult,
given that the brain has no direct access to the world. This renders perception
into an inverse problem (Pizlo, 2001; Spratling, 2017): the brain has to infer a
distal stimulus in the physical world (i.e., cause) from proximal sensations coded
in the brain (i.e., effect) (Fechner, 1948). Moreover, given inherently noisy and
ambiguous sensory information, the problem also becomes ill-posed. For example,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

01

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

an exponentially growing number of object arrangements and
viewing conditions in the three-dimensional world can form the
same two-dimensional retinal image.
How does the brain overcome such ambiguity, find a unique
and stable solution to the inverse problem, and facilitate seamless
perception? A confluence of constructivist theories of perception
(Helmholtz, 1867; Kant, 1908; MacKay, 1956; Neisser, 1967;
Gregory, 1970; Pennartz, 2015) suggests that the brain imposes
a priori constraints on possible solutions to the inverse problem
based on an internal model of the world shaped by prior knowledge,
experience, and context. In light of recent neurophysiological
evidence that supports interaction of feedforward sensory inputs
and feedback of a priori knowledge (Felleman and Van Essen, 1991;
Bastos et al., 2012; Keller et al., 2012; Walsh et al., 2020), predictive
coding (PC) has been proposed as a possible neural implementation
of perception (Srinivasan et al., 1982; Mumford, 1992; Rao and
Ballard, 1999; Friston, 2005; Pennartz et al., 2019). According to PC
in its canonical version (Rao and Ballard, 1999), the brain employs
hierarchical cortical circuits in which feedback connections carry
predictions to lower areas, whereas feedforward connections carry
the mismatch between actual and predicted neural activity (i.e.,
prediction error). The prediction error is used iteratively to correct
the internal generative model, allowing to make more accurate
inferences, but also to learn from errors. While its computational
goal to explain away incoming sensory input resembles the ideas
of redundancy reduction from information theory (Shannon,
1948) and the efficient coding hypothesis (Barlow, 1961), the
probabilistic formalization of PC algorithms that approximate
Bayesian inference (Friston, 2010) builds on the Bayesian brain
hypothesis (Knill and Pouget, 2004) and Helmholtz machine
(Dayan et al., 1995). In summary, PC offers a Bayes-inspired
solution to the inverse and ill-posed problem of perception,
and learning thereof, under the imperative of prediction error
minimization. A primary goal of PC modeling is therefore to
develop perceptual representations, from which inputs can be
generatively reconstructed, in a biologically plausible manner,
whereas the more “cognitive” goal of stimulus categorization or
classification comes in second position.
Thanks to its potential to explain a multitude of cognitive and
neural phenomena (Srinivasan et al., 1982; Rao and Ballard, 1999;
Hosoya et al., 2005; Jehee et al., 2006; Spratling, 2010, 2016; Huang
and Rao, 2011; Wacongne et al., 2012), PC has inspired many
theoretical and computational models of perception. On the one
hand, there are biologically motivated PC models in the literature
to explain neural mechanisms of perception; on the other hand,
machine learning inspired models seek missing ingredients that can
place the perceptual capacity of artificial intelligence on par with
nature’s most intelligent machine. However, both approaches lack
biological plausibility in their own respect. Biologically motivated
PC models demonstrate how PC accounts for neuronal responses
such as classical and extra-classical receptive field properties,
but whether their efforts can be generalized across the cortical
processing hierarchy remains an open question as their models
were confined to specific components of the nervous system,
such as the retina (Srinivasan et al., 1982; Hosoya et al., 2005),
lateral geniculate nucleus (Huang and Rao, 2011), or V1 (Spratling,
2010), or had a limited depth of processing hierarchy (Rao and

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

Ballard, 1999; Spratling, 2010; Wacongne et al., 2012). The machine
learning inspired models show remarkable object recognition
capabilities but lack the biological plausibility due to their reliance
on supervised learning, convolutional filters, and backpropagation
of errors (Whittington and Bogacz, 2017; Sacramento et al., 2018;
Van den Oord et al., 2018; Wen et al., 2018; Han et al., 2019; Lotter
et al., 2020). Meanwhile, there has been an effort to bridge the
gap between the two approaches: a deep gated Hebbian PC (Dora
et al., 2021) successfully learns internal representations of natural
images across multiple layers of the visual processing hierarchy,
while exhibiting neuronal response properties such as orientation
selectivity, object selectivity, and sparseness. Yet, previous models
relied on an artificial neural network, the basic computational
unit of which mimics a real neuron with limited biological
realism (Maass, 1997) and communicates using synchronous and
continuous signals instead of spikes.
To advance the biological realism of computational models
of PC and move toward a more biologically plausible model of
perception, we developed a spiking neural network for predictive
coding (SNN-PC) by introducing two novel features: (1) a spiking
neuron model (Maass, 1997; Gerstner, 2002) that describes the
behavior of neurons with more biological details than firingrate based artificial neurons, such as using binary, asynchronous
spikes for synaptic communication and replacing a simple nonlinear activation function with synaptic and membrane potential
dynamics; and (2) a feedforward gist (FFG) pathway that is added
to a PC hierarchy, and mimics the gist of a scene or image
(Oliva and Torralba, 2006), inspired by how the visual cortical
system may rapidly recognize objects using a fast feedforward
visual pathway (Thorpe et al., 1996; Serre et al., 2007; VanRullen,
2007). While our primary goal is to build a spiking neural
network that learns a generative model of input image patterns
(i.e., to perform image reconstructions) via predictive coding with
biologically plausible mechanisms, we also investigate whether such
a generative model can be used for a discriminative task (i.e.,
classification) despite having no explicit objective to optimize it.
We hypothesize that having a coarse-level prior about incoming
stimuli via the FFG pathway would help with forming classifiable
latent representations. In the following sections, we describe nontrivial problems in implementing a spiking version of PC networks,
such as encoding signed signals with binary spikes and finding
error gradients for experience-dependent learning, and offer our
biologically plausible solutions to make PC compatible with spikes.
We show that, by putting together all the pieces, SNN-PC can learn
hierarchical representations of MNIST hand-written digit images
and infer unseen samples from spike signals of sensory inputs in an
unsupervised manner.

2 Materials and methods
The following section is organized into four subsections, which
address challenges of implementing a PC neural network with
spiking neurons and propose biologically plausible mechanisms to
facilitate perceptual inference and learning: (1) introduction of a
spiking neuron model; (2) description of synaptic communication
between spiking neurons for reliable signal transmission and

02

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

TABLE 1 Parameters for the adaptive exponential integrate-and-ﬁre
model.

Parameter

Value

s(t) =

281

pF

gL

30

nS

EL

−70.6

mV

Vθ

−50.4

mV

1T

2

mV

tref

2

ms

c

4

nS

b

0.0805

nA

τa

144

ms

τrise

5

ms

τdecay

50

ms

s(t) = 1

V(t) > Vθ

(3)

V(t) = Vr

& a(t) = a(t) + b

(4)

The behavior of the single neuron model described in the
previous section (Equations 1–4) is a function that takes incoming
current, I(t), as input and a spike train, s(t), as output. For synaptic
communication between spiking neurons, there must be a way to
convert the output of a source neuron to input of a target neuron.
The current entering a postsynaptic cell j (postsynaptic current;
PSC) through N synapses from presynaptic cells i can be formulated
as a continuous variable, Ij (t), by applying an exponential lowpass filter to each incoming binary spike train to compute a spike
trace, Xi (t), and weighting each spike trace with the corresponding
synaptic strength, Wi,j , and summing the weighted spike traces over
N synapses (Equation 5):

The behavior of single neurons in SNN-PC was defined by
the adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire model (Brette and
Gerstner, 2005):

Ij (t) =

N
X

Wi,j Xi (t)

(5)

i

The spike trace, Xi (t), is similar to the trace variable commonly
used in spike timing dependent plasticity (STDP). With a proper
choice of time constants, it approximates a generic excitatory
postsynaptic current (EPSC) that reflects both the fast component
driven by AMPA receptors (τrise = 5 ms) and the slow
component mediated by NMDA receptors (τdecay = 50 ms)
(Forsythe and Westbrook, 1988; McBain and Dingledine, 1993) as
follows:

V(t) − Vθ
dV
= −gL ∗ (V(t) − EL ) + gL 1T exp
+ I(t) − a(t)
dt
1T
(1)
da
= c(V(t) − EL ) − a(t)
dt

−→

2.2 Synaptic communication between
spiking neurons

2.1 Single neuron model

(2)

where Cm is the membrane capacitance, V(t) the membrane
potential, gL the leak conductance, EL the leak reversal potential,
1T the slope factor, Vθ the action potential threshold, a(t) the
adaptation variable, I(t) the incoming synaptic current, τa the
adaptation time constant, and c the adaptation coupling parameter.
The parameter values are taken from Brette and Gerstner (2005)
and listed in Table 1.
The membrane potential dynamics (Equation 1) is described
by a linear leak, a voltage-dependent exponential activation,
which instantiates the fast activation of sodium channels (Badel
et al., 2008), the incoming synaptic current, I(t), and an
abstract adaptation variable, a, which couples the membrane
potential dynamics with voltage-dependent subthreshold and
spike-triggered adaptation (Equation 2) (Gerstner et al., 2014).
At each time point of simulation, t, a neuron sums up all
incoming current, I(t), at its postsynaptic terminals to update its
membrane potential, V(t). Upon reaching the threshold, Vθ , a spike
is generated [i.e., s(t) = 1]:

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

if

otherwise

A spike is followed by an instantaneous reset of the membrane
potential, V, to the resting potential, (Vr = −70.6 mV), and an
increase of adaptation variable (a) by an amount (b) to model
membrane potential repolarization and spike-triggered current
adaptation, respectively:

Hebbian learning; (3) separation of error-computing neurons into
two groups to encode signed signals with dynamic binary spikes;
and (4) introduction of the FFG pathway to establish informed
initial conditions for prediction-generating neurons as opposed to
random initialization.

τa

1,
0,

Unit

Cm

Cm

(

Y(t)
X(t)
dX
=
−
dt
τrise
τdecay

(6)

In particular, the NMDAR-mediated component of the EPSC
(“NMDAR current”) can be linked to the intracellular calcium
concentration at the postsynaptic site, a high value of which
leads to long term potentiation (LTP) (Barria and Malinow, 2005;
Granger and Nicoll, 2014). Using the NMDAR currents of pre- and
postsynaptic neurons, synaptic weights are adjusted by Hebbian
learning. The modification of weights is described in a subsequent
section.
The first term in Equation (6) governs the rising slope
of the EPSC corresponding to the influx of cations into the
postsynaptic neuron, whereas the second term describes its decay.
The instantaneous reset of the variable, Y(t), initializes glutamate
release into the synaptic cleft, where it binds to AMPA and NMDA

03

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

receptors to open up ion channels in the postsynaptic membrane
(Equation 7):

Third, the membrane potential, Vj (t), generates a spike, sj (t),
when it crosses the threshold, Vθ :

prediction) or negative (i.e., prediction < input). The signed nature
of the prediction error poses no obstacle to PC models with artificial
neurons, which can encode positive and negative signals. However,
given the non-negative nature of spike signals, SNN-PC has to
adopt a different solution that can encode both types of prediction
error. As observed in the dopaminergic system, a neuron may
encode both types of prediction error by expressing the magnitude
of error in relation to its baseline firing rate: positive errors are
encoded with activity above its baseline firing rate and negative
errors with activity below (Schultz et al., 1997). However, such
a neuron would require a very high spontaneous firing rate to
encode the full range of negative responses, which contrasts with
experimental evidence that suggests low baseline firing rates of
layer 2/3 principal neurons (De Kock et al., 2007; Perrenoud et al.,
2016). Moreover, in a system where single neurons encode bidirectional errors, a postsynaptic neuron that receives error signals
must have a mechanism to subtract out the baseline firing rate of a
presynaptic neuron. Given the discrete and non-linear dynamics
of spiking neurons, which renders accurate approximation of
synaptic transmission non-trivial, our attempts to implement bidirectional error coding with spiking neurons led to inaccurate
propagation of prediction errors. Therefore, we separated the error
unit into two subtypes, one coding positive and the other coding
negative error (Figure 2B). The two units are complementary in
propagating prediction errors to representation units in the next
higher area. A positive error unit (Equation 12) integrates bottomup excitatory inputs from representation units within the same
area, XRℓ (t), and top-down inhibitory inputs from representation
units of the area above, (W ℓ,ℓ+1 )T XRℓ+1 (t), whereas a negative error
unit (Equation 13) has the opposite arrangement of excitatoryinhibitory synapses:

h3 : Vj (t) 7→ sj (t)

ℓ
(t) = XRℓ (t) − (W ℓ,ℓ+1 )T XRℓ+1 (t)
IE+

(12)

ℓ
(t) = (W ℓ,ℓ+1 )T XRℓ+1 (t) − XRℓ (t)
IE−

(13)

s(t) = 1

−→

Y(t) = 1

(7)

The glutamate concentration in the synaptic cleft decays
exponentially back to the resting state [i.e., Y(t) → 0] (Equation 8):
dY
Y(t)
=−
dt
τdecay

(8)

In summary, the synaptic communication consists of three
major steps (Equations 9–11), which can be seen as a serial
adaptation of the spike emission and reception filters in the spike
response model (Gerstner et al., 2014). For example, consider the
following case where presynaptic neurons (indexed by i) project to
a postsynaptic neuron j (Figure 1):
First, a spike train from neuron i, si (t), is converted to
an AMPA- and NMDA-receptor mediated postsynaptic current
received by neuron j, Ij (t):

h1 : si (t) 7→ Ij (t)

(9)

Second, the current arriving at the postsynaptic receptor site of
neuron j, Ij (t), influences the membrane potential of neuron j, Vj (t):

h2 : Ij (t) 7→ Vj (t)

(10)

(11)

2.3 Implementation of predictive coding

Note that top-down predictions to both positive and negative
units are the same ((W ℓ,ℓ+1 )T XRℓ+1 (t)). Representation units and
the two types of error unit within an area contain the same number
of cells and connect to each other in a one-to-one fashion (i.e.,
ℓ,ℓ
Wi,j
= 1 where i = j and 0 elsewhere), so that error units receive
the same bottom-up input, or its latent representation in the case of
higher areas, and compare it to the top-down prediction.

SNN-PC employed the same hierarchical structure as its two
predecessors (Figure 2A) (Rao and Ballard, 1999; Dora et al.,
2021). Each area (denoted by superscript ℓ) consists of two
types of computational units (denoted by subscript i): (1) a
representation unit, Rℓi , which infers the causes (i.e., generates
latent representations) of incoming sensory inputs in the area below
(Rℓ−1
) and makes predictions about the neural activity in the area
i
below; and (2) an error unit, Eiℓ , which compares the prediction
from the area above with inputs from the area below and propagates
the difference (i.e., prediction error) to the representation units in
the area above (Rℓ+1
) to update the inferred causes and refine the
i
prediction.

2.3.2 Representation unit
Representation units infer the causes of sensory input via local
interactions with error units in the area immediately below as well
as those in the same area (Figure 2A). The interactions between
two immediately adjacent areas are considered local, because they
do not involve areas further down or up in the hierarchy (at least
not directly) as would be commonly used in standard deep learning
algorithms such as BP, which require global interactions from the
top area to the lowest area. The inference process can be regarded as
an iterative process of updating internal representations of sensory
stimuli (or of neural activity of representation units, IRℓ ), and is
mathematically formalized as performing a gradient descent on the

2.3.1 Error unit
An error unit computes prediction errors by taking the
difference between the sensory input in the lowest area, or its latent
representation in the case of higher areas, and the corresponding
prediction from the area above. Depending on the relative strengths
of the two signals, this difference can be positive (i.e., input >

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

04

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

FIGURE 1

Synaptic transmission in a spiking neural network for predictive coding. (A) Schematic showing how spiking neurons in SNN-PC communicate with
each other using spikes. Spikes from neurons i (black), si (t), activating synapses that impinge on dendrites of neuron j (red), are converted to spike
traces, Xi (t). The sum of all spike traces, weighted by synaptic strength, Wi,j , make up the postsynaptic current, Ij (t). In this particular scheme, we
assume that all weights are 1 for simplicity. The postsynaptic membrane potential, Vj (t), changes according to the incoming current and the cell
emits spikes, sj (t), whenever it reaches threshold, Vθ . (B) A presynaptic spike (si (t) = 1) triggers glutamate release into the synaptic cleft [Yi (t) = 1].
When glutamate binds to the postsynaptic AMPA and NMDA receptors, the inward current of cations (Na+ and Ca2+) depolarizes the postsynaptic
cell (K+ efflux not shown here for brevity). Concentrations of glutamate in the synaptic cleft and cations (Na+ and Ca2+) in the postsynaptic terminal
decrease exponentially [Yi (t) → 0 and Xi (t) → 0, respectively] with time constants, τrise and τdecay , respectively.

FIGURE 2

Adaptations of the classic predictive coding (PC) architecture to different levels of biological detail. (A) The classic PC architecture with
representation (prediction) and error neurons as described by Rao and Ballard (1999). (B) To encode signed error signals with binary spikes, an error
ℓ
ℓ
unit in A, Enℓ , is separated into two units, E+,n
and E−,n
, which compute a positive and negative error, respectively, via the opposite arrangement of
excitatory-inhibitory synapses. The superscript (ℓ) denotes the cortical processing area, whereas the subscript (n or m) denotes an index for unit in an
area. (C) A biological interpretation of a computational unit in SNN-PC, which consists of a pyramidal cell (green triangle) and an interneuron (orange
circle). An excitatory synapse exists between pyramidal cells of two units, whereas a polysynaptic inhibitory connection is formed by a pyramidal cell
in a computational unit to an interneuron in another unit, which inhibits the pyramidal cell within the same unit.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

05

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

FIGURE 3

Spiking neural network for predictive coding (SNN-PC). SNN-PC modeling the ﬁrst stages of the visual cortical processing hierarchy. The three areas
roughly correspond to V1, V2, and V4, respectively (or LGN, V1, and V2). Each non-input area (ℓ > 0) consists of a representation unit (purple circle;
ℓ
ℓ
) that encode positive and negative prediction error, respectively. The representation unit in Area 0
and E−
Rℓ ) and two units (blue and red squares; E+
acts as an input unit (R0 ). Each pixel (e.g., the dotted box in the image of digit 4) is encoded by a single spiking neuron. Note that each unit consists of
multiple spiking neurons. The feedforward gist pathway (R0 → G → Rℓ ) approximates the feedforward sweep of neuronal activity across the visual
processing hierarchy. The solid lines between units indicate that they are fully connected, whereas the dotted lines indicate one-to-one connections.
A triangle represents an excitatory synapse, whereas a thick vertical short ending represents an inhibitory synapse.

2.4 Feedforward gist pathway

cost function of prediction error minimization with respect to the
internal representation (Rao and Ballard, 1999). In SNN-PC, this
first comes down to a sum of incoming synaptic current to each
representation neuron:

ℓ−1
ℓ−1
β+
= W ℓ−1,ℓ XE+
(t)

(15)

Visual cortical processing can be parsed into two distinct
processes (Lamme and Roelfsema, 2000): (1) the fast feedforward
sweep of neuronal activity across the visual processing hierarchy
roughly within 150 ms of stimulus onset in primates, which is
thought to generate coarse high-level representation of a visual
scene and facilitates gist perception and rapid object recognition
(Rousselet et al., 2005; Serre et al., 2007; VanRullen, 2007; Liu et al.,
2009; Cauchoix et al., 2016); and (2) slow recurrent processing that
iteratively refines the representation (a process henceforth referred
to as inference). SNN-PC implements the former process with a
FFG pathway and the latter process with the PC hierarchy.
The FFG pathway approximates the feedforward sweep across
the visual hierarchy via sparse random projections from input to
gist units (Figure 4):

ℓ−1
ℓ−1
= W ℓ−1,ℓ XE−
(t)
β−

(16)

IG (t) = WI,G XG (t)

ℓ−1
ℓ−1
ℓ
ℓ
− β−
− β+
+ β−
IRℓ (t) = β+

(0 < ℓ < L) (14)

The first two terms in Equation (14) represent the bottom-up
ℓ−1
ℓ−1
positive and negative prediction error (β+
and β−
), computed
as weighted sums of postsynaptic currents arising from the
connections between the two error units and representation units,
respectively (Equations 15, 16):

The last two elements of Equation (14) are top-down positive
ℓ and β ℓ ), respectively, which are connected
and negative errors (β+
−
to representation units in a one-to-one fashion (Equations 17, 18):

ℓ
β+
= XEℓ + (t)

(17)

ℓ
β−
= XEℓ − (t)

(18)

The weights between input and gist units (WI,G in Equation 19)
were randomly sampled from a Gaussian distribution, the mean
and standard deviation of which were defined as a ratio between
the number of pre- and postsynaptic units. To induce sparsity, the
connection probability between input and gist units was set to a low
value (Pc = 0.05; Figure 4A).
To reflect the increasing receptive field size and complexity of
tuning properties when ascending the visual processing hierarchy,
the number of gist units (16) is set to be smaller than input units
(784). The resulting neuronal activity patterns in gist units therefore
correspond to a coarse-grained representation of incoming sensory
input. As all input images are processed by the same set of nonplastic, sparse random weights, images that share more features
(e.g., two samples belonging to the category of digit “1”) have a
higher chance to generate similar neural activity patterns in gist
units than those that share less (e.g., a sample belonging to digit
“0” and another belonging to “1”); in other words, by statistically
sampling the same area in the visual field given different images,

In the case of the highest area (e.g., Area 3 in Figure 3), these
two terms are absent as it lacks top-down connections.
Sensory inputs are fed into the network via representation units
in the lowest area (Area 0), each of which receives a constant
current linearly proportional to the intensity of a pixel of the
input image (Figure 3). The underlying assumption is that such
a transduction is roughly comparable to a retinal image (with a
resolution of a pixel). Given an MNIST digit sample (28 × 28 pixel
image) as visual input, the number of units in Area 0 is 784.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

(19)

06

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

FIGURE 4

The fast feedforward gist pathway. (A) A fast feedforward sweep of neural activity from input (R0 ) to representation units (Rℓ where ℓ ∈ {1, 2, 3}) via gist
units (G) is instantiated by sparse random connections to generate a spatially reduced, abstract representation of an input image, which provides an
informative baseline for the upcoming iterations of recurrent processing. Purple dashed lines show example projections from input to gist units,
whereas green dashed lines show example projections from gist to representation units in areas 1–3 of the visual processing hierarchy. Each tilted
square represents an example neural activity pattern activated by an input image in each area. The colored elements in each area correspond to
mean incoming synaptic currents. (B) A comparison between internal representations formed in areas involved in the feedforward gist pathway (R0 ,
G, and Rℓ where ℓ ∈ {1, 2, 3}). Note that representation units only receive synaptic inputs from gist units and exclude other synaptic currents from the
recurrent dynamics of the PC hierarchy (Rℓ = WG,Rℓ XG ). The bar plot displays a measure of similarity between input images and internal
representations. Strong correlations indicate that the representational geometry of input images is retained across the FFG pathway (R0 → G) and
that representation units in each cortical area (G → Rℓ where ℓ ∈ {1, 2, 3}) receive informative stimulus-based priors about the upcoming inference.
Each element in a representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM) below each bar represents a measure of dissimilarity between 128 different samples per
digit (0–9).

the latent representations of input images in gist units retain the
representational geometry of input images (Figure 4B).
Gist units then project to representation units in each area of
the PC hierarchy to modulate their activity. The synaptic input
coming from gist units can be implemented into the inference step
(Equation 14) by adding an extra term (WG,Rℓ XG ):

In summary, the FFG pathway serves the role of initializing
the neuronal activity of representation units in each area with a
coarse representation of the incoming sensory input (e.g., the gist
of a scene or object). Instead of starting the iterative process of
prediction error minimization from zero or arbitrary activity in
representation units, the gist-like latent representation of incoming
sensory inputs operates in a biologically plausible manner.

ℓ−1
ℓ−1
ℓ +
IRℓ (t) = β+
− β−
− β+
ℓ +W
β−
G,Rℓ XG (t)

(0 < ℓ < L)

(20)

2.5 Rate-based Hebbian learning

The FFG pathway runs in parallel with the PC hierarchy and is
active as long as the stimulus lasts to provide a high-level, coarse
representation of the incoming sensory input to representation
units in each PC area (WG,Rℓ XG ; Equation 20) as a baseline activity.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

With non-differentiable binary spike signals, s(t), the error
gradient required to correct the internal model cannot be obtained.

07

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

FIGURE 5

Hebbian learning for spiking neurons. In SNN-PC, synaptic plasticity is mediated by Hebbian learning. Instead of ﬁring rates used in artiﬁcial neural
networks, SNN-PC approximates NMDA receptor-mediated postsynaptic calcium dynamics, Xi (t) and Xj (t), in each cell, based on incoming spike
trains, si (t) and sj (t), and leverages them to compute a biologically plausible learning gradient, 1Wi,j . The red and blue dotted box indicate the time
window, the last tw ms (from T - tw to T, where T is the total duration of stimulus presentation), during which the approximate postsynaptic calcium
transient signals are averaged.

However, we can use exponentially filtered spike trains, X(t), to
obtain the ingredients required for Hebbian learning (Figure 5).
A weight matrix, W ℓ,ℓ+1 , between error and representation
units (Figure 3), is updated via:

ℓ,ℓ+1
1W+
=

T
1
1 X ℓ
XE+ (t) ×
tw
tW
t=T−tw

T
X

ℓ,ℓ+1
ℓ,ℓ+1
1W ℓ,ℓ+1 = γw (1W+
− 1W−
) − αw g(W ℓ,ℓ+1 ) (ℓ < L)
(23)
The weight change is controlled by the learning rate, γw . The
last term, αw g(W ℓ,ℓ+1 ), models the passive decay of weights by
imposing a Laplacian prior on the weights (i.e., L1 regularization)
(Dora et al., 2021) (Equation 24):

XRℓ+1 (t) (ℓ < L) (21)

t=T−tw

g :x →

T
T
1 X ℓ
1 X ℓ+1
ℓ,ℓ+1
1W−
=
XE− (t) ×
XR (t) (ℓ < L) (22)
tw
tw
t=T−tw

t=T−tw

1,

if x > 0

0,

otherwise

(24)

The resulting unsupervised learning algorithm can be regarded
as a biologically plausible form of Hebbian learning. It uses
the AMPA- and NMDA-receptor mediated postsynaptic currents
between neurons located in adjacent cortical areas (i.e., area ℓ and
ℓ + 1), thereby requiring only locally available information. This is
in contrast to backpropagation, which often requires explicit labels
(supervised learning) and an end-to-end propagation of errors,
from individual output units up to input units. Note that only
inter-areal weights (W ℓ,ℓ+1 ) are subject to synaptic plasticity. The
intra-areal weights (W ℓ,ℓ ) are fixed.

The two terms in Equations (21, 22) are mean NMDAR
current amplitudes entering the postsynaptic site of error and
representation units from the last tw milliseconds (ms) of stimulus
presentation (total duration = T ms): Equation (22) specifies the
use of positive error and Equation (22) of negative error. Apart
from convergence and stability purposes to accommodate spiking
dynamics, taking this mean reflects the calcium dynamics in
dendritic spines, which induce NMDA receptor-dependent long
term plasticity and depression (LTP and LTD) (Collingridge and
Bliss, 1987; Malenka and Nicoll, 1993; Lüscher et al., 2000). The
positive error units contact representation units with excitatory
synapses to increase the calcium influx into representation
units and can induce LTP, whereas the negative error units
make inhibitory synaptic contact to decrease calcium influx and
induce LTD (Mulkey and Malenka, 1992). Combining the two
(Equations 21, 22) results in a weight update that is a linear
combination of the Hebbian error gradients obtained between
postsynaptic representation units and the two types of presynaptic
error units (Equation 23):

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

(

2.6 Simulation details
2.6.1 Preprocessing of input image
The input images were normalized to unit vectors to limit the
variance among pixel intensity distributions across different digits
and samples and scaled to a range between 600 and 3,000 pA, within
which the input and output synaptic currents approximated a linear
relationship.

08

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

TABLE 2 Parameters for simulation.

Parameter

Meaning

Each test set was randomly sampled from 10,000 images that the
network had not seen during the training.
For learning, we took the mean over the last 100 ms (300–
400 ms) of synaptic current relative to the onset of the stimulus to
ensure convergence. Weights were initialized randomly, but strictly
positive, by sampling from a half-normal distribution around zero
mean and a small standard deviation (0.3). They were updated
after every batch with an initial learning rate (γw ) of 1e-7 and
a regularization parameter (αw ) of 1e-5. The learning rate for
each pair of areas (e.g., Area 1 and 2) was adjusted by fitting the
normalized root mean squared errors of input area (e.g., Area 1) to
an exponential growth function.

Value

nR0

0

Number of units in R

784

nE+0

0
Number of units in E+

784

nE−0

0
Number of units in E−

784

nR1

1

Number of units in R

400

nE+1

1
Number of units in E+

400

nE−1

1
Number of units in E−

400

nR2

Number of units in R2

225

nE+2

2
Number of units in E+

225

nE−2

2
Number of units in E−

225

nR3

3

Number of units in R

64

nG

Number of units in G

16

dt

Simulation time step

1 ms

τw

Time window for synaptic plasticity

100 ms

T

Total simulation time per sample

350 ms

γw

Learning rate for synaptic plasticity

1e-7

αw

Regularizer for synaptic plasticity

1e-5

ntrain
sample

Number of samples in training set

5,120

ntest
sample

Number of samples in test set

1,280

nbatch
sample

Number of samples in a mini-batch

32

epoch
nbatch

Number of mini-batches per training epoch

160

nepoch

Number of training epochs

50

2.7 Representational similarity analysis
A representational similarity analysis (RSA; Kriegeskorte
et al. 2008) computes pairwise similarity between population
responses for given inputs. The output of this analysis generates a
representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM), each block of which
represents the dissimilarity (1 − correlation) between responses
to different images. To assess the consistency of information
propagation through the processing hierarchy, we conducted RSA
on the internal representations of input images (XRℓ ). We used the
Spearman rank correlation coefficient as a measure of correlation
distance between internal representations (see Kriegeskorte et al.
2008 for more choices of distance measures). A second-order
RSA computes a similarity measure between RDMs and represents
how similarly two areas of interest respond to a given set of
input patterns, thereby revealing consistency in representational
geometry (i.e., how well internal representations reflect the
relationship between input images).

2.6.2 Network size
Each area consisted of the same number of positive error units,
negative error units, and representation units (Area 0 = 784 × 3 =
2,352; Area 1 = 400 × 3 = 1,200; Area 2 = 225 × 3 = 675), except
the top area (Area 3) that only contained 64 representation units
(Table 2). There were 16 gist units. In total, the number of units in
SNN-PC was 4,307. Out of 431,842 total synapses in the network,
418,000 inter-areal synapses were subject to synaptic plasticity.

3 Results
3.1 Representational learning
As a generative model with an objective function of prediction
error minimization, SNN-PC is expected to generate internal
representations of input stimuli, which capture their underlying
structures (i.e., probability distribution) in a high-dimensional
latent space and, therefore, can be used to reconstruct them.
To test this representational capacity, we trained it with a small
subset of the MNIST handwritten image dataset (nclass = 10 and
nimage = 5120; 8.5% of a full set, which has 60,000 images) and
evaluated its internal representations of those images. Moreover,
while a two-layer structure suffices for image reconstruction in
principle, we investigated the impact of hierarchical dynamics on
reconstruction performance and other cognitive functions such
as image classification by introducing additional processing areas.
Note that classification capacity of learned internal representations
is only a serendipitous byproduct of our original goal: learning
a generative model. We report that additional hierarchical
constraints do not impair or improve reconstruction performance.
Learning performance can first be qualitatively assessed from
the error units in the lowest area (Area 0), which receive bottomup sensory inputs that directly correspond to pixel intensities of

2.6.3 Training and testing
In order to test whether SNN-PC can learn statistical
regularities of incoming sensory inputs and build latent
representations thereof, we trained SNN-PC with a subset of
the MNIST handwritten digit image dataset. The training set
sample
(ntrain = 5, 120; Table 2) consisted of many different image
samples per image class (digits 0–9; 512 samples / class). For
efficient learning, we used mini-batch training (nbatch
sample = 32).
During a single training epoch, the network goes through all
epoch
mini-batches (nbatch = 160). After each mini-batch, the synaptic
weights are updated. After 50 training epochs (nepoch = 50), we
tested the model to infer image samples it had not been exposed
to during the training, taken from a test set (ntest
sample = 1, 280).
For statistical inference, the testing phase was repeated 100 times.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

09

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

FIGURE 6

Learning of MNIST handwritten digits. (A) Reconstruction of sensory inputs. Input to each area (XRℓ ; left) is compared to the prediction (W ℓ,ℓ+1 XRℓ+1 )
made from the area immediately above (right). (B) Inference. Normalized root mean squared prediction errors (NRMSEs) in each area across training
epochs computed by SNN-PC. (C) Representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) constructed with images in the input area (middle row, right
column) and inferred causes of those images in each area from SNN-PC with (left column). Each element in an RDM represents a measure of
dissimilarity between them (1 − correlation). (D) Second-order representational similarity analysis. The RDM of input neuron activities is compared
against the RDMs of inferred causes of those input signals in each area of the SNN-PC model.

input images (XR0 ) and top-down predictions that reconstruct them
(W 0,1 XR1 ). By organizing neural activity patterns that correspond
to the predictions (Area 1 → 0) into the input shape (28 × 28
pixels), the images reconstructed by SNN-PC can be visualized.
SNN-PC was able to reconstruct digit images well (Figure 6A;
top subpanel). While similar inspection in higher areas showed
matching patterns between input and prediction (Figure 6A; Area
2 → 1 shown in the middle and Area 3 → 2 shown in the
bottom subpanel) as well, predictions in higher areas (W ℓ+1,ℓ XRℓ ;
Area ℓ + 1 → ℓ where ℓ > 1) bear no immediately
recognizable meaning to a human beholder; therefore, they are
called latent representations. To show that learning takes place
in all areas more evidently, we show the normalized root mean
squared errors (NRMSE) as a scale-free measure of the discrepancy
between incoming inputs (either sensory or from area 1 to 2
or area 2 to 3) and their predictions. The decreasing NRMSEs
in all three areas across training epochs (Figure 6B) indicate
that SNN-PC learned to hierarchically minimize prediction
errors. Furthermore, a representational similarity analysis (RSA)
(Kriegeskorte et al., 2008) on the internal representations of input
images (XRℓ ) revealed that similar representations were formed
across the hierarchy. Note that the colored square boxes shown
in Figure 6C are representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs),
which illustrate all pairwise dissimilarities (1 − correlation) among
the internal representations corresponding to the input images. To
quantitatively evaluate how well those internal representations (XR0 )

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

reflect the relationship between input images (i.e., representational
geometry), we conducted a second-order RSA. The results revealed
that Area 1 exhibited a high correlation with inputs, whereas
Area 2 and 3 displayed weak correlations with inputs (Figure 6D).
Furthermore, despite the decreasing prediction errors (Figure 6B;
middle and bottom subpanels), reconstructions of input images
from Area 2 and 3 [i.e., W 0,1 (W 1,2 XR2 ) and W 0,1 (W 1,2 (W 2,3 XR3 ))]
failed to produce the input images. Hence, for the subsequent
analyses in this study, we will focus on the neuronal activities
of Area 1 (XR1 ) and refer to them as SNN-PC’s internal,
latent representation of input images. Possible reasons for the
underperformance in higher areas will be examined in the
Discussion section. Overall, good reconstruction performance
(Figure 6A; top subpanel), proper prediction error minimization
(Figure 6B; top subpanel), and strong representational similarity
(Figures 6C, D; Area 1) in Area 1 suggest that SNN-PC has
successfully extracted statistical regularities from sensory inputs
and updated its internal representations to infer their causes more
accurately.

3.2 Robustness of latent representations
To examine the robustness of the representational capacity of
SNN-PC, we tested it on a set of MNIST digit images, which it
had not seen during the training (i.e., “Clean" set; nclass = 10 and

10

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

FIGURE 7

Robustness of internal representations. (A) SNN-PC’s reconstruction of novel (previously unseen; “Clean"), noisy (“Noise"), and occluded (“Occlude")
images. The network was able to generalize the internal model acquired during training to novel instances and denoise. However, it does not fully
restore the occluded part of an image. (B) The robustness of internal representations against addition of noise or partial loss of input signals is shown
by RDMs among novel input images and corresponding internal representations. (C) The internal representations were highly correlated to novel
input images (ρ > 0.6 for all bars in C). Note that robustness refers to the network’s representational capacity to preserve the relationship between
input images in the high-dimensional, latent space (i.e., representational geometry) against input perturbations. (D) Digit class information can be
decoded better from internal representations than input images with or without input perturbations. For statistical comparisons in (C, D), we
computed RDMs and classiﬁcation accuracy on 100 test sets (nimg = 1,280) randomly sampled from the “Clean" test set (nimg = 10,000). Differences
between the means were then assessed by Mann-Whitney U-test. Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated by asterisks (***p ≤ 0.001). Error bars indicating
95% conﬁdence intervals. Note that a linear classiﬁer was trained only once on Clean images and internal representations inferred from those images
and tested on Clean, Noise, and Occlude dataset images and corresponding internal representations.

nimage per class = 128). Subsequently, we challenged the robustness
by testing the network on two additional datasets created by
modifying the input statistics of the Clean set: (1) the first set
(“Noise") was given additive Gaussian noise, ǫ ∼ N (0, 300) (with
pA as unit), that spanned across the whole image; and (2) the
second set (“Occlude") was masked by occlusion patches at random

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

locations on images (patch size = 9 × 9 pixel; 10.3% of an image).
Note that the network had been trained only on Clean images but
tested on all three input variants.
We found that SNN-PC was able to generalize the internal
model it had acquired during the training onto novel instances
as shown by both faithful reconstruction (Figure 7A; Clean) and

11

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

those of the original model (“PC + FFG"), which employs both the
PC hierarchy and the FFG pathway, and the FFG pathway model
(“FFG-only”), in which input signals were processed only by the
FFG pathway.
Without PC, the FFG pathway could not faithfully
reconstruct input images (Figure 8A; FFG-only), formed internal
representations that were only weakly correlated to input images
(ρ < 0.4; Figures 8B, C; FFG-only), and performed poorly on a
digit classification task [decoding accuracy of FFG-only model or
DA (FFG-only) ≈0.6; Figure 8D; FFG-only]. These results were
consistent with our modeling objectives for the FFG pathway: it
was designed to generate only a coarse representation of input
images. Note that, to visualize the gist-like internal representations,
we reconstructed input images using synaptic weights from a
model trained with both FFG and PC (PC + FFG).
On the other hand, PC could reconstruct input images in the
absence of FFG just as well as in its presence (Figure 8A; PC-only).
In fact, internal representations correlated significantly more with
input images without than with FFG inputs to the network [ρ
(PC-only) > ρ(PC + FFG) with p < 0.001; Figure 8B]. However,
a model classified the digit class of images better when it had
learned statistical regularities of those images with both PC and
FFG pathway than PC alone [DA (PC + FFG) > DA (PC-only) with
p < 0.001; Figure 8D].
The reconstruction of sensory inputs was achieved with
or without the FFG pathway, because internal representations
are inferred via the PC hierarchy which is configured to
minimize the difference between sensory inputs and a linear
transformation of internal representations (i.e., prediction error).
However, the difference in representational similarity to input
images between the two cases (Figure 8C; PC + FFG vs. PConly; p < 0.001) suggests that they did not converge on
the same internal representations, despite both preserving the
representational geometry of input images (ρ > 0.8 in both cases).
The only difference between the two cases in how they inferred
internal representations of input images was the prior: with the
FFG pathway, representation units are provided with informative
priors about input images through sparse connections (ρ >
0.3; Figure 8C; FFG-only); whereas a purely PC network assumes
uniform priors about input images. In sum, our results suggest that
the FFG pathway aids representational learning via PC by providing
informative priors about sensory inputs for the upcoming inference
process, helping to infer internal representations that are more
discriminative of class information than the uniform priors of
PC alone. Effectively, the FFG can be said to install a prior
in the network based on which the PC machinery refines the
representation.

RDMs that highly correlated with input images (ρ > 0.8,
where ρ is Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient; Figures 7B, C,
Clean). It was also able to denoise (Figure 7A; Noise) and retain
representational geometry of input images (ρ > 0.6; Figures 7B, C,
Noise). Meanwhile, pixels behind random occlusion patches were
not fully restored (Figure 7A; Occlude); thus, the Clean version
of the input was not pattern-completed, whereas the occluded
input as offered was in fact faithfully reconstructed. However,
internal representations generated from partially occluded images
still showed strong correlation with input images (ρ > 0.6;
Figures 7B, C, Occlude).
The contrast between dissimilarities within and between classes
in an RDM reflects the network’s capability of encoding sensory
inputs into meaningful latent representations; a greater contrast
indicates more generalizable representations and often leads to
a better classification performance. The reduced contrast in the
RDMs of Noise or Occlude input neuron activities compared to
those of Clean input neuron activities (Figure 7B; “Clean" vs. Noise
and Clean vs. Occlude at input level) reflects the effect of additive
Gaussian noise or random patch occlusion on input images.
This loss of representational similarity from input perturbations
persisted in the RDMs of latent representations (Figure 7C; “Clean”
vs. Noise and Clean vs. Occlude at the internal representation level).
However, the corresponding internal representations in both input
variants were still strongly correlated with original images (ρ >
0.6).
To assess the robustness of the discriminative capacity of
SNN-PC against input perturbations, we trained a linear classifier
on the internal representations of images from the training set
without any perturbations (the same set as in Figure 6; nclass =
10 and nimage per class = 512) and tested it on the images from
test sets with (Clean) and without input perturbations (Noise and
Occlude). For statistical comparison, Mann-Whitney’s U-test was
used on the classification results of 100 test sets (nclass = 10
and nimage per class = 128) randomly sampled from 10,000 images.
Our results revealed that digit class could be decoded better from
internal representations than from input images themselves in all
three input variants (Figure 7D; p < 0.001).

3.3 The effect of the feedforward gist
pathway
While the faithful input reconstruction, consistent
representational geometry, and improved decoding observed
with novel (Clean) and corrupted (Noise and Occlude) datasets
could indicate meaningful representation learning of input
statistics, the effect of the FFG pathway remained elusive thus
far. For instance, the network could also have learned to build an
internal model entirely based on feedforward gist inputs, thereby
rendering the recurrent dynamics of PC redundant, or vice versa.
To investigate the contribution of the FFG pathway to perceptual
inference and learning, we trained another network on the same
training set without the FFG pathway (“PC-only"), which learns the
underlying structures of input images purely from the recurrent
dynamics of PC. We compared reconstruction, representational
geometry, and classification results of the PC-only model against

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

4 Discussion
While inspired by biological neurons, artificial neural
networks make many assumptions for the sake of functional and
computational efficiency. For instance, the assumption underlying
the use of firing rates as a measure of neural activity is that
information is rate coded. However, the brain is also thought to
encode information using both the timing of spikes (e.g., phase
coding and neural synchrony) (Gray et al., 1989; O’Keefe and

12

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

FIGURE 8

Effect of the feedforward gist pathway on representational learning. Three models were compared against each other on input reconstruction,
representational geometry, and classiﬁcation: (1) a model that processes input stimuli via both the PC hierarchy and the FFG pathway (“PC + FFG");
(2) a model that utilizes only the PC hierarchy (“PC-only"); and (3) the FFG pathway model (“FFG-only"). (A) Input reconstruction is a result of the
recurrent dynamics of PC (PC + FFG and PC-only). The FFG pathway alone cannot account for the generative capacity (FFG-only). (B) PC preserves
the metric relationship (1 − correlation) among input images in the representational geometry. (C) In the presence of PC, internal representations
show a strong correlation with inputs (ρ > 0.8). The FFG pathway alone generates coarse, gist-like representations that only weakly correlate to input
images (ρ < 0.4). (D) The FFG pathway helps slightly but signiﬁcantly in inferring internal representations from input images that are more
discriminative of digit class than PC-only. For statistical comparisons in (C, D), we computed RDMs and classiﬁcation accuracy on 100 test sets (nimg
= 1,280) randomly sampled from the “Clean" test set (nimg = 10,000). Differences between the means were then assessed by Mann-Whitney U-test.
Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated by asterisks (***p ≤ 0.001). Error bars indicating 95% conﬁdence intervals. Note that four separate linear classiﬁers
were trained on input images and internal representations inferred from those images by the three model variants.

into an arbitrary iteration step, artificial neurons cannot leverage
asynchronous, event-based, and sparse information processing for
energy efficiency (Pfeiffer and Pfeil, 2018; Tavanaei et al., 2019;
Deng et al., 2020). Moreover, the non-local, end-to-end error
propagation of BP, often used in ANNs, poses a serious challenge

Recce, 1993; Singer, 1999; Knoblauch and Palm, 2001; Van Rullen
and Thorpe, 2001; Brette, 2012; Ono and Oliver, 2014) and
aggregate responses of neuronal ensembles (i.e., population
coding) (Georgopoulos et al., 1986; Lee et al., 1988; Pouget et al.,
2000; Averbeck et al., 2006). By collapsing the temporal dimension

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

13

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

internal representations of occluded images in the latent space
than from actual images themselves (Figure 7D; Occlude). This
implies that SNN-PC was able to capture underlying structures of
digit images during training, which were indeed robust against a
partial loss of pixels. A recent study (Papale et al., 2023) showed
comparable experimental evidence to our results: multi-unit
spiking activity of monkey V1 neurons exhibited a significantly
weaker response to occluded regions than non-occluded regions;
nevertheless, the scene information could be decoded from a
cross-decoding experiment (i.e., training on non-occluded images
and testing on occluded images).
Additionally, SNN-PC was able to denoise. While structural
similarity index measure (SSIM; Wang et al., 2004) values decrease
with an increasing level of noise, the network was able to denoise
up to a high level of Gaussian noise, and the reconstruction
performance did not acutely break down within a range of 0–200
% (figure not shown here). Given the nature of an inference model
that builds upon statistical regularities of input signals, SNN-PC
simply cannot make predictions about noise, which by definition
is unpredictable. Hence, it leveraged on those input signals that
could be predicted and showed denoised reconstructions, robust
internal representations, and better decodability from internal
representations than noisy images themselves.

to biological plausibility (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Bengio et al.,
2015; Sacramento et al., 2018; Whittington and Bogacz, 2019;
Lillicrap et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). To create a realistic system
that performs complex cognitive behaviors on par with a human
agent, we need to study and incorporate principles of neural
computation and architectures from the biological agent we want
to mimic, namely the mammalian brain. A straightforward choice
in pursuing such endeavors therefore was to introduce spiking
neurons, as they provide a biophysically realistic level of detail to
simulate basic computations in the brain.
To this end, we developed a biologically grounded neural
network for generative visual modeling (SNN-PC), based on the
following four components: (1) a predictive coding model that
provides computational algorithms and a neural architecture for
generative perceptual inference via recurrent sensory processing;
(2) a FFG pathway that accounts for rapid feedforward processing
in the visual cortical system; (3) spiking neurons that reflect
the time-varying pulsatile behavior of neurons better than
rate-based neurons; and (4) Hebbian learning enabled by
NMDAR-mediated synaptic plasticity. The model learned to
reconstruct and develop latent representations of the MNIST
handwritten digit images using only a small subset of the
image dataset (8.5% of the full dataset) and an unsupervised
learning method that requires only locally available information
at each level of the hierarchy (as opposed to end-to-end
backpropagation). Furthermore, our implementation of PC is
based on biologically grounded mechanisms such as an adaptive
spike generation mechanism, synaptic transmission modeling
the effect of presynaptic spikes on the postsynaptic membrane
potential, and synaptic plasticity based on calcium transients in
postsynaptic dendritic spines.

4.2 Novel features of the predictive coding
model with spiking neurons
To our knowledge, no predictive coding model has been
proposed before that is operating purely with spiking neurons,
except for the spiking neural coding network (SpNCN) proposed in
Ororbia (2023). While SNN-PC and SpNCN similarly implement
synaptic transmission (i.e., low-pass filtering of spike trains) and
weight updating (i.e., Hebbian learning), a few key differences arise
from the additional biological constraints we placed on our model.
For example, spiking neurons in SNN-PC are based on the AdEx
model, which offers a biophysically more accurate description of
a neuron’s behavior than the leaky-and-integrate fire (LIF) model
used in SpNCN (Brette and Gerstner, 2005). However, the most
noteworthy difference is that error units in SNN-PC are explicitly
modeled as spiking neurons and separated into two groups to
encode both positive and negative error with binary spikes, as
opposed to being an arbitrary unit that signals a signed difference
between two exponentially filtered spike trains, as in Ororbia
(2023). While such an arbitrary error unit might be biologically
implemented in a dendritic compartment model (e.g., Urbanczik
and Senn 2014; Mikulasch et al. 2023), our implementation of
error neurons follows experimentally observed mismatch between
feedforward and feedback signals in visual cortical neurons (e.g.,
of the somatostatin-positive type) (Keller et al., 2012; Zmarz and
Keller, 2016; Attinger et al., 2017). Moreover, having two types
of error unit to compute positive and negative error separately
also circumvents the need to employ unrealistic negative synaptic
weights for inhibitory connections (Figure 2B). A growing body
of recent studies suggests that layer 2/3 of cortex indeed contains
neurons that express positive or negative errors (Keller et al., 2012;
Jordan and Keller, 2020; O’Toole et al., 2023).

4.1 Robustness against noise and
occlusion
While previous studies have explored robustness of PC
network’s generative capacity against noise and partial occlusion,
both denoising and pattern completion require structural
modifications such as lateral connections and auxiliary connections
between non-local areas (Ororbia, 2023) or algorithmic
adjustments such as adding a memory vector and unclamping
input units of the missing pixels from an input image and allowing
it to vary from top-down prediction (Salvatori et al., 2021) or
conditional inference on pre-trained labels (Salvatori et al., 2022).
Our results exhibit a contrary case, where the missing part is not
filled in by the top-down prediction; rather, the SNN-PC infers
faithfully from the actual sensory inputs (i.e., with occlusion). This
is because, without structural or algorithmic modifications, the
local prediction error minimization loop always aligns predictions
to inputs. Also, assuming that the reconstruction of sensory inputs
from Area 1 of SNN-PC is a direct prediction of the retinal image,
the pattern completion should not occur as a subject never actually
sees the occluded part. For example, if you walk on a street and find
an uncovered manhole, it is not in your interest to fill it in based
on priors built upon previous encounters with covered manholes.
However, the digit class information was better decoded from

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

14

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

Despite having solved the implausible negative weight problem,
all units in SNN-PC (when viewed as single neurons) do not adhere
to another biological property (i.e., Dale’s principle) as they can
ℓ−1
projection) and
form both excitatory (in case of the Rℓ → E+
ℓ−1
ℓ
inhibitory (R → E− ) synapses onto other units. However, such
a violation can be mitigated by replacing computational units in
ℓ , and Eℓ ; Figure 2B) by cortical microcircuits
SNN-PC (Rℓj , E+,i
−,i
that consist of pyramidal cells and interneurons (e.g., green triangle
and orange circle wrapped inside purple, blue, and red contours,
respectively; Figure 2C). Note that we used one pyramidal cell and
one interneuron in a microcircuit for visual presentation purposes
only. Using this microcircuit, we predict that an excitatory synapse
ℓ ) is formed between
between two microcircuits (e.g., Rℓm and E+,n
their pyramidal cells, whereas an inhibitory synapse between
the two microcircuits consists of an excitatory connection from
pyramidal cells in a microcircuit (e.g., Rℓm ) to interneurons in
ℓ ), which then inhibits pyramidal
another microcircuit (e.g., E−,n
ℓ ). Future research will have
cells in the same microcircuit (e.g., E−,n
to show how PC can be implemented using known anatomical
connections (Douglas and Martin, 1991), laminar organization
(Bastos et al., 2012; Pennartz et al., 2019), and different cell types
(e.g., pyramidal, SST, VIP, and PV) (Keller and Mrsic-Flogel, 2018;
O’Toole et al., 2023).
Besides offering a biologically plausible solution to
accommodate binary spiking dynamics, the explicit separation
of error units into positive and negative elements may also
be beneficial for the algorithmic and computational efficiency
of neuromorphic hardware. It only requires a straightforward
subtraction between input and prediction, whereas bi-directional
error units (such as postulated in reinforcement learning models
based on prediction error coding by mesencephalic dopamine
neurons) (Schultz et al., 1997) must first compute the difference
and then compare it against a baseline firing rate to determine
the sign of the error. With a certain baseline firing rate, positive
and negative errors can be encoded by the range above and below
it, respectively. However, for a full coverage of prediction error
ranges, bidirectional error units must maintain a high baseline
firing rate, thereby leading to a higher energy cost. The neuron
targeted by a bidirectional error unit would also have to be
equipped with a mechanism to discount for the baseline firing rate
to obtain the true prediction error.

(Lamme and Roelfsema, 2000). While the precise contributions of
feedforward and recurrent processes to perception are yet to be
determined (Kreiman and Serre, 2020), we aimed to combine these
two temporally distinct processes by integrating the FFG pathway
in a PC architecture and asked whether the FFG pathway can
improve network performance.
Reflecting on the temporal dichotomy of the two visual
processes, the FFG pathway quickly establishes a high-level, coarse
representation of input signals (e.g., the gist of a scene or
object) and feeds it to each area of the PC hierarchy to aid the
recurrent processing that slowly refines the representation. Instead
of starting the iterative process of prediction error minimization
from zero or arbitrary activity in representation units, the gistlike latent representation of incoming sensory inputs offers a
biologically plausible starting point for predictive coding. This
suggests a novel function of the feedforward activity relative to
the classic hypothesis of rapid image recognition (Thorpe et al.,
1996).
When we tested the impact of the FFG pathway on the
learning of two-dimensional visual images, our results showed
that its presence during training leads to reduced consistency
between internal representations in higher areas with input image
statistics (Figure 8). Despite the faithful reconstruction of novel
and perturbed sensory inputs, which is largely driven by the
recurrent dynamics of the prediction error minimization loop, the
diminished classification accuracy in the absence of FFG suggests
that the latent representations formed without gist inputs have
extracted less information from the image statistics (Figure 8D).
These findings suggest that the FFG plays a modest, but statistically
significant role, in achieving classifiable latent representations by
placing an a priori constraint on the inference process. Effectively,
the FFG can be said to install a prior in the network based on which
the PC machinery refines the representation, and which improves
classifiability.
Meanwhile, it is not clear whether the same populations
of cortical neurons may be involved in both the feedforward
sweep and recurrent PC. Instead of performing a series of
feedforward feature extraction and integration steps to elicit
object-sensitive responses in high visual areas, feedforward
connections in the PC network convey prediction errors.
Therefore, the two processes might take separate routes. For
instance, recurrent processes governed by PC may occur via
cortico-cortical pathways, whereas the feedforward sweep may
be mediated by the pulvino-cortical pathway or by bottom-up
projections from low-level visual areas like lateral occipital cortex
(Vinberg and Grill-Spector, 2008; Jaramillo et al., 2019). Such
involvement of subcortical pathways is in line with the brain
not being strictly hierarchical (Suzuki et al., 2023). Alternatively,
the FFG pathway can be explained as a combination of the
fast feedforward sweep and subsequent top-down modulation:
an instantaneous feedforward sweep may activate gist units,
conceptualized as IT, PFC, or other high-level cells; this may
then be followed by top-down projection of activity from gist to
representation units in lower visual areas (e.g., V1, V2, V3 and
V4).?
In both scenarios, we assume innate and nonplastic feedforward connections in the FFG pathway. A

4.3 Feedforward gist
Another important novel feature of SNN-PC is the FFG
pathway, which combines the fast feedforward sweep and the
slow recurrent PC to account for a more comprehensive picture
of visual processing. PC reconciles bottom-up and top-down
accounts of perception by casting it as an inferential process
that involves hierarchical recurrent interactions. However, the
inference process requires multiple loops of recurrent processing to
converge on an accurate representation of incoming sensory input.
The expected latency of visual responses arising from recurrent
predictive processing is not in accordance with the rapid forward
spread of object- and context-sensitive neuronal activity across
the visual cortical hierarchy within 100 ms of stimulus onset

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

15

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

recent study (Tschantz et al., 2023) examined how such
feedforward connections can be trained via amortized
inference and also showed robust perceptual capacity
with shorter error convergence time and fewer training
samples. However, we note that SNN-PC is spike-based
and unsupervised, whereas the model in Tschantz et al.
(2023) is rate-based and uses a mix of supervised and
unsupervised learning.

would also obviously compromise the pursuit of biological
realism.

4.5 Future directions
There are various other ways in which future studies may
extend the biological details and/or perceptual capacities of SNNPC. To name a few, first, a point spiking neuron can be
replaced by a cortical microcircuit with multiple interneurons
(e.g., Figure 2C) and with a columnar organization to replicate
experimental findings and make predictions for new experiments.
Second, spiking neuron behavior or connectivity can be altered to
implement receptive fields and response properties to construct
an invariant object representation (c.f. Brucklacher et al., 2023).
Third, self-recurrent loops or online learning rules such as STDP
may be employed to deal with a continuous stream of sensory
inputs. Fourth, a population coding regime can be implemented
to improve the reliability of signal transmission (Boerlin and
Denève, 2011). Fifth, a different sensory modality can be added
to perform multi-sensory integration, following the rate-based
predecessor of our current SNN-PC model (Dora et al., 2021),
which has been implemented in a rodent robot that performs
bimodal integration of vision and touch to navigate in a maze
(Pearson et al., 2021). Sixth, the network can be scaled up
to better reflect the areas involved in the visual processing
hierarchy. Seventh, while requiring novel learning rules, different
coding schemes known to exist in the brain, such as temporal
coding (Konishi, 2000; Van Rullen and Thorpe, 2001; Ono
and Oliver, 2014), phase coding (O’Keefe and Recce, 1993),
and the use of neural synchrony (Gray et al., 1989; Singer,
1999; Knoblauch and Palm, 2001; Brette, 2012), can be explored
to make use of computational advantages offered by spiking
signals.

4.4 Limitations on scalability
While our results show that SNN-PC can generalize what it
had learned from a training set to novel instances of the test
set (Figure 7; Clean), higher areas (area 2 and 3) were excluded
from analyses beyond Figure 6 due to their weak correlations to
input images and subpar reconstruction performance, implying
that their representations in the latent space do not capture the
underlying statistics well. Despite the decreasing prediction error
in higher areas in the PC hierarchy during training (Figure 6B;
areas 2 and 3), the progressive decrease in representational
similarity across the hierarchy (Figure 6C; areas 2 and 3) suggests
a loss of information about the inputs. A possible source of
information leakage is the spiking mechanism of a neuron, which
fires upon reaching a threshold membrane potential (Vθ ), that
renders the input-output curve of a current-based spiking neuron
non-linear. By consequence, a signal (e.g., an input current of
1,000 pA) loses its strength as it propagates through a series
of neurons. Given that each cortical processing area in SNNPC can reliably reconstruct inputs from the lower network area
(Figure 6A) and that Area 1 generates internal representations
of input images with a high decodability (Figures 7D, 8D), the
most likely location for the information leak would be between
representation and error neurons within the same area (Rℓ →
ℓ
E+/−
). Addressing this leakage will require further work in future
studies.
Again, we want to stress that the classification capacity of
learned representations is only a byproduct of our original goal:
learning a generative model. We also emphasize that, despite
the low number of training samples, and the adjustments made
to the PC algorithms that facilitate spike communication, we
demonstrate generative capacity via reconstruction of previously
unseen images (Figure 7A; Clean) and robustness against noise
and occlusion (Figure 7A; Noise and Occlude). However, as for
classification results, the decoding accuracy did not increase
when ascending hierarchical processing areas. This is of no
surprise, given the sole objective function of local prediction
error minimization: there is no constraint during the training
phase to learn to categorize inputs; the network is only
instructed to learn internal representations that can reconstruct
inputs from the area immediately below. In fact, SNN-PC
fulfills this objective (Figures 6A, B). Meanwhile, we think that
SNN-PC can be converted to a competitive discriminative
model, if the topmost area would be clamped to class labels
corresponding to inputs to the lowest area during training to
learn class-specific representations via supervised learning (as
in Whittington and Bogacz, 2017). This approach, however,

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

5 Conclusion
We have described how to build a PC model of visual
perception using biologically plausible components such as
spiking neurons, Hebbian learning, and a FFG pathway.
As one of the first purely spike-based and completely
unsupervised PC models of visual perception, SNN-PC
successfully performs perceptual inference and learning as
shown by reconstruction of MNIST digit images. Also, it can
denoise and show robust decodability of class information
from noisy and partially occluded images. Our findings may
inspire machine learning, neuromorphics, neuroscience and
cognitive science communities to seek avenues moving closer
to mimic the nature’s most intelligent and efficient system, the
brain.

Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.

16

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

Author contributions

Acknowledgments

KL: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal
analysis, Conceptualization. SD: Writing – review & editing,
Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. JM: Writing –
review & editing, Methodology, Conceptualization. SB: Writing
– review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation,
Conceptualization. CP: Writing – review & editing, Supervision,
Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition,
Conceptualization.

The authors would like to thank Matthias Brucklacher, Giulia
Moreni, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Walter Senn for constructive
discussions.

Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The author(s) declared that they were an editorial board
member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact
on the peer review process and the final decision.

Funding
The author(s) declare financial support was received for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. This project
has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
Framework Programme for Research and Innovation under the
Specific Grant Agreement No. 945539 (Human Brain Project
SGA3 to CP). We acknowledge the use of Fenix Infrastructure
resources, which are partially funded from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme through the
ICEI project under the grant agreement No. 800858.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.

References
Attinger, A., Wang, B., and Keller, G. B. (2017). Visuomotor coupling
shapes the functional development of mouse visual cortex. Cell 169, 1291–1302.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.023

Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R. M., and Zemel, R. S. (1995). The helmholtz
machine. Neural Comput. 7, 889–904. doi: 10.1162/neco.1995.7.5.889
De Kock, C. P. J., Bruno, R. M., Spors, H., and Sakmann, B. (2007). Layer- and
cell-type-specific suprathreshold stimulus representation in rat primary somatosensory
cortex. J. Physiol. 581, 139–154. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2006.124321

Averbeck, B. B., Latham, P. E., and Pouget, A. (2006). Neural correlations,
population coding and computation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 358–366. doi: 10.1038/nrn
1888

Deng, L., Wu, Y., Hu, X., Liang, L., Ding, Y., Li, G., et al. (2020). Rethinking
the performance comparison between snns and anns. Neural Netw. 121, 294–307.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.09.005

Badel, L., Lefort, S., Brette, R., Petersen, C. C., Gerstner, W., and Richardson, M.
J. (2008). Dynamic iv curves are reliable predictors of naturalistic pyramidal-neuron
voltage traces. J. Neurophysiol. 99, 656–666. doi: 10.1152/jn.01107.2007

Dora, S., Bohte, S. M., and Pennartz, C. M. A. (2021). Deep gated Hebbian predictive
coding accounts for emergence of complex neural response properties along the
visual cortical hierarchy. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 15:65. doi: 10.3389/fncom.2021.66
6131

Barlow, H. (1961). Possible principles underlying the transformations of sensory
messages. Sens. Commun. 1, 217–234.
Barria, A., and Malinow, R. (2005). Nmda receptor subunit composition
controls synaptic plasticity by regulating binding to camkii. Neuron 48, 289–301.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.08.034

Douglas, R. J., and Martin, K. (1991). A functional microcircuit for cat visual cortex.
J. Physiol. 440, 735–769. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1991.sp018733

Bastos, A. M., Usrey, W. M., Adams, R. A., Mangun, G. R., Fries, P., and Friston,
K. J. (2012). Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron 76, 695–711.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038

Fechner, G. T. (1948). Elements of Psychophysics, 1860. East Norwalk, CT: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Felleman, D. J., and Van Essen, D. C. (1991). Distributed hierarchical processing in
the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–47. doi: 10.1093/cercor/1.1.1

Bengio, Y., Lee, D.-H., Bornschein, J., Mesnard, T., and Lin, Z. (2015). Towards
biologically plausible deep learning. arXiv [preprint]. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1502.04156
Boerlin, M., and Denève, S. (2011). Spike-based population coding and working
memory. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7:e1001080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001080

Forsythe, I. D., and Westbrook, G. L. (1988). Slow excitatory postsynaptic currents
mediated by n-methyl-d-aspartate receptors on cultured mouse central neurones. J.
Physiol. 396, 515–533. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1988.sp016975

Brette, R. (2012). Computing with neural synchrony. PLoS Comput. Biol.
8:e1002561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002561

Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Transact. R. Soc. B 360,
815–836. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2005.1622

Brette, R., and Gerstner, W. (2005). Adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire model
as an effective description of neuronal activity. J. Neurophysiol. 94, 3637–3642.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00686.2005

Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138. doi: 10.1038/nrn2787
Georgopoulos, A. P., Schwartz, A. B., and Kettner, R. E. (1986). Neuronal population
coding of movement direction. Science 233, 1416–1419. doi: 10.1126/science.3749885

Brucklacher, M., Bohte, S. M., Mejias, J. F., and Pennartz, C. M. (2023). Local
minimization of prediction errors drives learning of invariant object representations in
a generative network model of visual perception. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 17:1207361.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2023.1207361

Gerstner, W. (2002). Spiking Neuron Models: Single Neurons, Populations, Plasticity.
Cambridge; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Cauchoix, M., Crouzet, S. M., Fize, D., and Serre, T. (2016). Fast ventral
stream neural activity enables rapid visual categorization. Neuroimage 125, 280–290.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.10.012

Gerstner, W., Kistler, W. M., Naud, R., and Paninski, L. (2014). Neuronal Dynamics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Granger, A. J., and Nicoll, R. A. (2014). Expression mechanisms underlying longterm potentiation: a postsynaptic view, 10 years on. Philos. Transact. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
369:20130136. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0136

Collingridge, G. L., and Bliss, T. (1987). Nmda receptors-their role in long-term
potentiation. Trends Neurosci. 10, 288–293. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(87)90175-5

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

17

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

Gray, C. M., König, P., Engel, A. K., and Singer, W. (1989). Oscillatory responses in
cat visual cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchronization which reflects global stimulus
properties. Nature 338, 334–337. doi: 10.1038/338334a0

Mikulasch, F. A., Rudelt, L., Wibral, M., and Priesemann, V. (2023). Where is the
error? Hierarchical predictive coding through dendritic error computation. Trends
Neurosci. 46, 45–59. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2022.09.007

Gregory, R. L. (1970). The Intelligent Eye. New York, NY: Mcgraw-Hill.

Mulkey, R. M., and Malenka, R. C. (1992). Mechanisms underlying induction
of homosynaptic long-term depression in area ca1 of the hippocampus. Neuron 9,
967–975. doi: 10.1016/0896-6273(92)90248-C

Han, T., Xie, W., and Zisserman, A. (2019). “Video representation learning by
dense predictive coding," in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshops.

Mumford, D. (1992). On the computational architecture of the neocortex. Biol.
Cybern. 66, 241–251. doi: 10.1007/BF00198477

Helmholtz, H. (1867). Handbuch der physiologischen Optiks, Allgemeine
Encyclopädie der Physik, IX. Band. Leipzig: Leopold Voss.

Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive Psychology. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Hosoya, T., Baccus, S. A., and Meister, M. (2005). Dynamic predictive coding by the
retina. Nature 436, 71–77. doi: 10.1038/nature03689

O’Keefe, J., and Recce, M. L. (1993). Phase relationship between hippocampal place
units and the eeg theta rhythm. Hippocampus 3, 317–330. doi: 10.1002/hipo.450030307

Huang, Y., and Rao, R. P. (2011). Predictive coding. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Cogn.
Sci. 2, 580–593. doi: 10.1002/wcs.142

Oliva, A., and Torralba, A. (2006). Building the gist of a scene: the
role of global image features in recognition. Prog. Brain Res. 155:23–36.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)55002-2

Jaramillo, J., Mejias, J. F., and Wang, X.-J. (2019). Engagement of pulvino-cortical
feedforward and feedback pathways in cognitive computations. Neuron 101, 321–336.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.11.023

Ono, M., and Oliver, D. L. (2014). The balance of excitatory and inhibitory
synaptic inputs for coding sound location. J. Neurosci. 34, 3779–3792.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2954-13.2014

Jehee, J. F., Rothkopf, C., Beck, J. M., and Ballard, D. H. (2006).
Learning receptive fields using predictive feedback. J. Physiol. 100, 125–132.
doi: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2006.09.011

Ororbia, A. (2023). Spiking neural predictive coding for continually learning from
data streams. Neurocomputing 544:126292. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2023.126292

Jordan, R., and Keller, G. B. (2020). Opposing influence of top-down and bottomup input on excitatory layer 2/3 neurons in mouse primary visual cortex. Neuron 108,
1194–1206. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.09.024

O’Toole, S. M., Oyibo, H. K., and Keller, G. B. (2023). Molecularly targetable cell
types in mouse visual cortex have distinguishable prediction error responses. Neuron
111, 2918–2928. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.08.015

Kant, I. (1908). Critique of Pure Reason. 1781. Cambridge, MA: Houghton Mifflin,
Modern Classical Philosophers.

Papale, P., Wang, F., Morgan, A. T., Chen, X., Gilhuis, A., Petro, L. S., et al. (2023).
The representation of occluded image regions in area v1 of monkeys and humans. Curr.
Biol. 33, 3865–3871. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2023.08.010

Keller, G. B., Bonhoeffer, T., and Hübener, M. (2012). Sensorimotor mismatch
signals in primary visual cortex of the behaving mouse. Neuron 74, 809–815.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.040

Pearson, M. J., Dora, S., Struckmeier, O., Knowles, T. C., Mitchinson, B., Tiwari,
K., et al. (2021). Multimodal representation learning for place recognition using deep
hebbian predictive coding. Front. Robot. AI 8:732023. doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.732023

Keller, G. B., and Mrsic-Flogel, T. D. (2018). Predictive processing: a canonical
cortical computation. Neuron 100, 424–435. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.10.003

Pennartz, C. (2015). The Brain’s Representational Power: On Consciousness and the
Integration of Modalities. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Knill, D. C., and Pouget, A. (2004). The bayesian brain: the role of
uncertainty in neural coding and computation. Trends Neurosci. 27, 712–719.
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2004.10.007

Pennartz, C. M., Dora, S., Muckli, L., and Lorteije, J. A. (2019). Towards a unified
view on pathways and functions of neural recurrent processing. Trends Neurosci. 42,
589–603. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2019.07.005

Knoblauch, A., and Palm, G. (2001). Pattern separation and synchronization
in spiking associative memories and visual areas. Neural Netw. 14, 763–780.
doi: 10.1016/S0893-6080(01)00084-3

Perrenoud, Q., Pennartz, C. M., and Gentet, L. J. (2016). Membrane potential
dynamics of spontaneous and visually evoked gamma activity in v1 of awake mice.
PLoS Biol. 14:21. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002383

Konishi, M. (2000). Study of sound localization by owls and its relevance
to humans. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Part A Mol. Integr. Physiol. 126, 459–469.
doi: 10.1016/S1095-6433(00)00232-4

Pfeiffer, M., and Pfeil, T. (2018). Deep learning with spiking neurons: opportunities
and challenges. Front. Neurosci. 12:774. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00774

Kreiman, G., and Serre, T. (2020). Beyond the feedforward sweep: feedback
computations in the visual cortex. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1464, 222–241.
doi: 10.1111/nyas.14320

Pizlo, Z. (2001). Perception viewed as an inverse problem. Vision Res. 41, 3145–3161.
doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(01)00173-0
Pouget, A., Dayan, P., and Zemel, R. (2000). Information processing with
population codes. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1, 125–132. doi: 10.1038/35039062

Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M., and Bandettini, P. A. (2008). Representational similarity
analysis-connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2:4.
doi: 10.3389/neuro.06.004.2008

Rao, R. P., and Ballard, D. H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a
functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nat. Neurosci.
2, 79–87. doi: 10.1038/4580

Lamme, V. A., and Roelfsema, P. R. (2000). The distinct modes of vision
offered by feedforward and recurrent processing. Trends Neurosci. 23, 571–579.
doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(00)01657-X

Rousselet, G., Joubert, O., and Fabre-Thorpe, M. (2005). How long
to get to the “gist” of real-world natural scenes? Vis. Cogn. 12, 852–877.
doi: 10.1080/13506280444000553
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning representations
by back-propagating errors. Nature 323, 533–536. doi: 10.1038/323533a0
Sacramento, J., Ponte Costa, R., Bengio, Y., and Senn, W. (2018). Dendritic cortical
microcircuits approximate the backpropagation algorithm. Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst. 31, 8721–8732.

Lee, C., Rohrer, W. H., and Sparks, D. L. (1988). Population coding of saccadic
eye movements by neurons in the superior colliculus. Nature 332, 357–360.
doi: 10.1038/332357a0
Lillicrap, T. P., Santoro, A., Marris, L., Akerman, C. J., and Hinton, G.
(2020). Backpropagation and the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 21, 335–346.
doi: 10.1038/s41583-020-0277-3
Liu, H., Agam, Y., Madsen, J. R., and Kreiman, G. (2009). Timing, timing, timing:
fast decoding of object information from intracranial field potentials in human visual
cortex. Neuron 62, 281–290. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.02.025

Salvatori, T., Song, Y., Hong, Y., Sha, L., Frieder, S., Xu, Z., et al. (2021). Associative
memories via predictive coding. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 34, 3874–3886.
Salvatori, T., Pinchetti, L., Millidge, B., Song, Y., Bao, T., Bogacz, R., et al. (2022).
Learning on arbitrary graph topologies via predictive coding. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. 35, 38232–38244.

Lotter, W., Kreiman, G., and Cox, D. (2020). A neural network trained for prediction
mimics diverse features of biological neurons and perception. Nat. Mach. Intellig. 2,
210–219. doi: 10.1038/s42256-020-0170-9

Schultz, W., Dayan, P., and Montague, P. R. (1997). A neural substrate of prediction
and reward. Science. 275, 1593–1599. doi: 10.1126/science.275.5306.1593
Serre, T., Oliva, A., and Poggio, T. (2007). A feedforward architecture
accounts for rapid categorization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 6424–6429.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700622104

Lüscher, C., Nicoll, R. A., Malenka, R. C., and Muller, D. (2000). Synaptic plasticity
and dynamic modulation of the postsynaptic membrane. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 545–550.
doi: 10.1038/75714
Maass, W. (1997). Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural
network models. Neural Netw. 10, 1659–1671. doi: 10.1016/S0893-6080(97)00011-7

Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J.
27, 379–423. doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x

MacKay, D. M. (1956). The epistemological problem for automata. Autom. Stud. 34,
235–251.

Singer, W. (1999). Neuronal synchrony: a versatile code for the definition of
relations? Neuron 24, 49–65. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80821-1

Malenka, R. C., and Nicoll, R. A. (1993). Nmda-receptor-dependent synaptic
plasticity: multiple forms and mechanisms. Trends Neurosci. 16, 521–527.
doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(93)90197-T

Song, Y., Lukasiewicz, T., Xu, Z., and Bogacz, R. (2020). Can the brain do
backpropagation?–exact implementation of backpropagation in predictive coding
networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, 22566–22579.

McBain, C. J., and Dingledine, R. (1993). Heterogeneity of synaptic glutamate
receptors on ca3 stratum radiatum interneurones of rat hippocampus. J. Physiol. 462,
373–392. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1993.sp019560

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

Spratling, M. W. (2010). Predictive coding as a model of response properties in
cortical area v1. J. Neurosci. 30, 3531–3543. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4911-09.2010

18

frontiersin.org

Lee et al.

10.3389/fncom.2024.1338280

Spratling, M. W. (2016). A neural implementation of bayesian inference based on
predictive coding. Conn. Sci. 28, 346–383. doi: 10.1080/09540091.2016.1243655

VanRullen, R. (2007). The power of the feed-forward sweep. Adv. Cogn. Psychol.
3:167. doi: 10.2478/v10053-008-0022-3

Spratling, M. W. (2017). A review of predictive coding algorithms. Brain Cogn. 112,
92–97. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2015.11.003

Vinberg, J., and Grill-Spector, K. (2008). Representation of shapes, edges, and
surfaces across multiple cues in the human visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 99,
1380–1393. doi: 10.1152/jn.01223.2007

Srinivasan, M. V., Laughlin, S. B., and Dubs, A. (1982). Predictive coding: a fresh
view of inhibition in the retina. Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B Biol. Sci. 216, 427–459.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1982.0085

Wacongne, C., Changeux, J.-P., and Dehaene, S. (2012). A neuronal model of
predictive coding accounting for the mismatch negativity. J. Neurosci. 32, 3665–3678.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5003-11.2012

Suzuki, M., Pennartz, C. M., and Aru, J. (2023). How deep is the brain? The shallow
brain hypothesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 778–791. doi: 10.1038/s41583-023-00756-z

Walsh, K. S., McGovern, D. P., Clark, A., and O’Connell, R. G. (2020). Evaluating
the neurophysiological evidence for predictive processing as a model of perception.
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1464, 242–268. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14321

Tavanaei, A., Ghodrati, M., Kheradpisheh, S. R., Masquelier, T., and Maida,
A. (2019). Deep learning in spiking neural networks. Neural Netw. 111, 47–63.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2018.12.002
Thorpe, S., Fize, D., and Marlot, C. (1996). Speed of processing in the human visual
system. Nature 381, 520–522. doi: 10.1038/381520a0

Wang, Z., Bovik, A. C., Sheikh, H. R., and Simoncelli, E. P. (2004). Image quality
assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transact. Image Process.
13, 600–612. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861

Tscshantz, A., Millidge, B., Seth, A. K., and Buckley, C. L. (2023). Hybrid
predictive coding: inferring, fast and slow. PLoS Comput. Biol. 19:e1011280.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011280

Wen, H., Han, K., Shi, J., Zhang, Y., Culurciello, E., and Liu, Z. (2018). “Deep
predictive coding network for object recognition,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning (PMLR), 5266–5275.

Urbanczik, R., and Senn, W. (2014). Learning by the dendritic prediction of somatic
spiking. Neuron 81, 521–528. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.11.030

Whittington, J. C., and Bogacz, R. (2017). An approximation of the error
backpropagation algorithm in a predictive coding network with local hebbian synaptic
plasticity. Neural Comput. 29, 1229–1262. doi: 10.1162/NECO_a_00949

Van den Oord, A., Li, Y., and Vinyals, O. (2018). Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding. arXiv [preprint]. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1807.03748

Whittington, J. C., and Bogacz, R. (2019). Theories of error back-propagation in the
brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 235–250. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.005

Van Rullen, R., and Thorpe, S. J. (2001). Rate coding versus temporal order coding:
what the retinal ganglion cells tell the visual cortex. Neural Comput. 13, 1255–1283.
doi: 10.1162/08997660152002852

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

Zmarz, P., and Keller, G. B. (2016). Mismatch receptive fields in mouse visual cortex.
Neuron 92, 766–772. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.057

19

frontiersin.org